The Project Gutenberg eBook of The History of Rome, Books 01 to 08

THE HISTORY OF ROME. BOOK ONE
BY 
TITUS LIVIUS.

THE HISTORY OF ROME.
BOOK I.


     _The coming of Æneas into Italy, and his achievements there; the
     reign of Ascanius in Alba, and of the other Sylvian kings. Romulus
     and Remus born. Amulius killed. Romulus builds Rome; forms a
     senate; makes war upon the Sabines; presents the_ opima spolia _to
     Jupiter Feretrius; divides the people into_ curiæ; _his victories;
     is deified. Numa institutes the rites of religious worship; builds
     a temple to Janus; and having made peace with all his neighbours,
     closes it for the first time; enjoys a peaceful reign, and is
     succeeded by Tullus Hostilius. War with the Albans; combat of the
     Horatii and Curiatii. Alba demolished, and the Albans made citizens
     of Rome. War declared against the Sabines; Tullus killed by
     lightning. Ancus Marcius renews the religious institutions of Numa;
     conquers the Latins, confers on them the right of citizenship, and
     assigns them the Aventine hill to dwell on; adds the hill Janiculum
     to the city; enlarges the bounds of the empire. In his reign Lucumo
     comes to Rome; assumes the name of Tarquinius; and, after the death
     of Ancus, is raised to the throne. He increases the senate, by
     adding to it a hundred new senators; defeats the Latins and
     Sabines; augments the centuries of knights; builds a wall round the
     city; makes the common sewers; is slain by the sons of Ancus after
     a reign of thirty-eight years; and is succeeded by Servius Tullius.
     He institutes the census; closes the lustrum, in which eighty
     thousand citizens are said to have been enrolled; divides the
     people into classes and centuries; enlarges the Pomoerium, and
     adds the Quirinal, Viminal, and Esquiline hills to the city; after
     a reign of forty years, is murdered by L. Tarquin, afterwards
     surnamed Superbus. He usurps the crown. Tarquin makes war on the
     Volsci, and, with the plunder taken from them, builds a temple to
     Jupiter Capitolinus. By a stratagem of his son, Sextus Tarquin, he
     reduces the city of Gabii; after a reign of twenty-five years is
     dethroned and banished, in consequence of the forcible violation of
     the person of Lucretia by his son Sextus. L. Junius Brutus and L.
     Tarquinius Collatinus first created consuls._




PREFACE.
Whether in tracing the history of the Roman people, from the foundation
of the city, I shall employ myself to a useful purpose,[1] I am neither
very certain, nor, if I were, dare I say: inasmuch as I observe, that it
is both an old and hackneyed practice,[2] later authors always supposing
that they will either adduce something more authentic in the facts, or,
that they will excel the less polished ancients in their style of
writing. Be that as it may, it will, at all events, be a satisfaction to
me, that I too have contributed my share[3] to perpetuate the
achievements of a people, the lords of the world; and if, amidst so
great a number of historians,[4] my reputation should remain in
obscurity, I may console myself with the celebrity and lustre of those
who shall stand in the way of my fame. Moreover, the subject is both of
immense labour, as being one which must be traced back for more than
seven hundred years, and which, having set out from small beginnings,
has increased to such a degree that it is now distressed by its own
magnitude. And, to most readers, I doubt not but that the first origin
and the events immediately succeeding, will afford but little pleasure,
while they will be hastening to these later times,[5] in which the
strength of this overgrown people has for a long period been working its
own destruction. I, on the contrary, shall seek this, as a reward of my
labour, viz. to withdraw myself from the view of the calamities, which
our age has witnessed for so many years, so long as I am reviewing with
my whole attention these ancient times, being free from every care[6]
that may distract a writer's mind, though it cannot warp it from the
truth. The traditions which have come down to us of what happened before
the building of the city, or before its building was contemplated, as
being suitable rather to the fictions of poetry than to the genuine
records of history, I have no intention either to affirm or refute. This
indulgence is conceded to antiquity, that by blending things human with
divine, it may make the origin of cities appear more venerable: and if
any people might be allowed to consecrate their origin, and to ascribe
it to the gods as its authors, such is the renown of the Roman people in
war, that when they represent Mars, in particular, as their own parent
and that of their founder, the nations of the world may submit to this
as patiently as they submit to their sovereignty.--But in whatever way
these and such like matters shall be attended to, or judged of, I shall
not deem of great importance. I would have every man apply his mind
seriously to consider these points, viz. what their life and what their
manners were; through what men and by what measures, both in peace and
in war, their empire was acquired[7] and extended; then, as discipline
gradually declined, let him follow in his thoughts their morals, at
first as slightly giving way, anon how they sunk more and more, then
began to fall headlong, until he reaches the present times, when we can
neither endure our vices, nor their remedies. This it is which is
particularly salutary and profitable in the study of history, that you
behold instances of every variety of conduct displayed on a conspicuous
monument; that from thence you may select for yourself and for your
country that which you may imitate; thence _note_ what is shameful in
the undertaking, and shameful in the result, which you may avoid. But
either a fond partiality for the task I have undertaken deceives me, or
there never was any state either greater, or more moral, or richer in
good examples, nor one into which luxury and avarice made their entrance
so late, and where poverty and frugality were so much and so long
honoured; so that the less wealth there was, the less desire was there.
Of late, riches have introduced avarice, and excessive pleasures a
longing for them, amidst luxury and a passion for ruining ourselves and
destroying every thing else. But let complaints, which will not be
agreeable even then, when perhaps they will be also necessary, be kept
aloof at least from the first stage of commencing so great a work. We
should rather, if it was usual with us (historians) as it is with poets,
begin with good omens, vows and prayers to the gods and goddesses to
vouchsafe good success to our efforts in so arduous an undertaking.

CHAPTER I.
Now first of all it is sufficiently established that, Troy having been
taken, the utmost severity was shown to all the other Trojans; but that
towards two, Æneas and Antenor, the Greeks forbore all the rights of
war, both in accordance with an ancient tie of hospitality, and because
they had ever been the advisers of peace, and of the restoration of
Helen--then that Antenor after various vicissitudes came into the
innermost bay of the Adriatic Sea, with a body of the Heneti, who having
been driven from Paphlagonia in consequence of a civil commotion, were
in quest both of a settlement and a leader, their king Pylæmenes having
been lost at Troy; and that the Heneti and Trojans, having expelled the
Euganei, who dwelt between the sea and the Alps, took possession of the
country; and the place where they first landed is called Troy; from
whence also the name of Trojan is given to the canton; but the nation in
general is called Veneti: that Æneas was driven from home by a similar
calamity, but the fates leading him to the founding of a greater empire,
he came first to Macedonia: that he sailed from thence to Sicily in
quest of a settlement: that from Sicily he made for the Laurentine
territory; this place also has the name of Troy. When the Trojans,
having disembarked there, were driving plunder from the lands,--as being
persons to whom, after their almost immeasurable wandering, nothing was
left but their arms and ships,--Latinus the king, and the Aborigines,
who then occupied those places, assembled in arms from the city and
country to repel the violence of the new-comers. On this point the
tradition is two-fold: some say, that Latinus, after being overcome in
battle, made first a peace, and then an alliance with Æneas: others,
that when the armies were drawn out in battle-array, before the signals
were sounded, Latinus advanced to the front of the troops and invited
the leader of the adventurers to a conference. That he then inquired who
they were, whence (they had come), or by what casualty they had left
their home, and in quest of what they had landed on the Laurentine
territory: after he heard that the host were Trojans, their chief Æneas,
the son of Anchises and Venus, and that, driven from their own country
and their homes, which had been destroyed by fire, they were seeking a
settlement and a place for building a town, struck with admiration of
the noble origin of the nation and of the hero, and their spirit, alike
prepared for peace or war, he confirmed the assurance of future
friendship by giving his right hand: that upon this a compact was struck
between the chiefs, and mutual greetings passed between the armies: that
Æneas was hospitably entertained by Latinus: that Latinus, in the
presence of his household gods, added a family league to the public one,
by giving Æneas his daughter in marriage. This event confirms the
Trojans in the hope of at length terminating their wanderings by a fixed
and permanent settlement. They build a town. Æneas calls it Lavinium,
after the name of his wife. In a short time, too, a son was the issue of
the new marriage, to whom his parents gave the name of Ascanius.

2. The Aborigines and Trojans were soon after attacked together in war.
Turnus, king of the Rutulians, to whom Lavinia had been affianced before
the coming of Æneas, enraged that a stranger had been preferred to
himself, made war on Æneas and Latinus together. Neither side came off
from that contest with cause for rejoicing. The Rutulians were
vanquished; the victorious Aborigines and Trojans lost their leader
Latinus. Upon this Turnus and the Rutulians, diffident of their
strength, have recourse to the flourishing state of the Etruscans, and
their king Mezentius; who holding his court at Coere, at that time an
opulent town, being by no means pleased, even from the commencement, at
the founding of the new city, and then considering that the Trojan power
was increasing much more than was altogether consistent with the safety
of the neighbouring states, without reluctance joined his forces in
alliance with the Rutulians. Æneas, in order to conciliate the minds of
the Aborigines to meet the terror of so serious a war, called both
nations Latins, so that they might all be not only under the same laws,
but also the same name. Nor after that did the Aborigines yield to the
Trojans in zeal and fidelity towards their king Æneas; relying therefore
on this disposition of the two nations, who were now daily coalescing
more and more, although Etruria was so powerful, that it filled with the
fame of its prowess not only the land, but the sea also, through the
whole length of Italy, from the Alps to the Sicilian Strait, though he
might have repelled the war by means of fortifications, yet he led out
his forces to the field. Upon this a battle ensued successful to the
Latins, the last also of the mortal acts of Æneas. He was buried, by
whatever name human and divine laws require him to be called,[8] on the
banks of the river Numicius. They call him Jupiter Indiges.

3. Ascanius, the son of Æneas, was not yet old enough to take the
government upon him; that government, however, remained secure for him
till the age of maturity. In the interim, the Latin state and the
kingdom of his grandfather and father was secured for the boy under the
regency of his mother (such capacity was there in Lavinia). I have some
doubts (for who can state as certain a matter of such antiquity) whether
this was the Ascanius, or one older than he, born of Creusa before the
fall of Troy, and the companion of his father in his flight from thence,
the same whom, being called Iulus, the Julian family call the author of
their name. This Ascanius, wheresoever and of whatever mother born, (it
is at least certain that he was the son of Æneas,) Lavinium being
overstocked with inhabitants, left that flourishing and, considering
these times, wealthy city to his mother or step-mother, and built for
himself a new one at the foot of Mount Alba, which, being extended on
the ridge of a hill, was, from its situation, called Longa Alba. Between
the founding of Lavinium and the transplanting this colony to Longa
Alba, about thirty years intervened. Yet its power had increased to such
a degree, especially after the defeat of the Etrurians, that not even
upon the death of Æneas, nor after that, during the regency of Lavinia,
and the first essays of the young prince's reign, did Mezentius, the
Etrurians, or any other of its neighbours dare to take up arms against
it. A peace had been concluded between the two nations on these terms,
that the river Albula, now called Tiber, should be the common boundary
between the Etrurians and Latins. After him Sylvius, the son of
Ascanius, born by some accident in a wood, ascends the throne. He was
the father of Æneas Sylvius, who afterwards begot Latinus Sylvius. By
him several colonies, called the ancient Latins, were transplanted. From
this time, all the princes, who reigned at Alba, had the surname of
Sylvius. From Latinus sprung Alba; from Alba, Atys; from Atys, Capys;
from Capys, Capetus; from Capetus, Tiberinus, who, being drowned in
crossing the river Albula, gave it a name famous with posterity. Then
Agrippa, the son of Tiberinus; after Agrippa, Romulus Silvius ascends
the throne, in succession to his father. The latter, having been killed
by a thunderbolt, left the kingdom to Aventinus, who being buried on
that hill, which is now part of the city of Rome, gave his name to it.
After him reigns Proca; he begets Numitor and Amulius. To Numitor, his
eldest son, he bequeaths the ancient kingdom of the Sylvian family. But
force prevailed more than the father's will or the respect due to
seniority: for Amulius, having expelled his brother, seizes the kingdom;
he adds crime to crime, murders his brother's male issue; and under
pretence of doing his brother's daughter, Rhea Sylvia, honour, having
made her a vestal virgin, by obliging her to perpetual virginity he
deprives her of all hopes of issue.

4. But, in my opinion, the origin of so great a city, and the
establishment of an empire next in power to that of the gods, was due to
the Fates. The vestal Rhea, being deflowered by force, when she had
brought forth twins, declares Mars to be the father of her illegitimate
offspring, either because she believed it to be so, or because a god was
a more creditable author of her offence. But neither gods nor men
protect her or her children from the king's cruelty: the priestess is
bound and thrown into prison; the children he commands to be thrown into
the current of the river. By some interposition of providence,[9] the
Tiber having overflowed its banks in stagnant pools, did not admit of
any access to the regular bed of the river; and the bearers supposed
that the infants could be drowned in water however still; thus, as if
they had effectually executed the king's orders, they expose the boys in
the nearest land-flood, where now stands the ficus Ruminalis (they say
that it was called Romularis). The country thereabout was then a vast
wilderness. The tradition is, that when the water, subsiding, had left
the floating trough, in which the children had been exposed, on dry
ground, a thirsty she-wolf, coming from the neighbouring mountains,
directed her course to the cries of the infants, and that she held down
her dugs to them with so much gentleness, that the keeper of the king's
flock found her licking the boys with her tongue. It is said his name
was Faustulus; and that they were carried by him to his homestead to be
nursed by his wife Laurentia. Some are of opinion that she was called
Lupa among the shepherds, from her being a common prostitute, and that
this gave rise to the surprising story. The children thus born and thus
brought up, when arrived at the years of manhood, did not loiter away
their time in tending the folds or following the flocks, but roamed and
hunted in the forests. Having by this exercise improved their strength
and courage, they not only encountered wild beasts, but even attacked
robbers laden with plunder, and afterwards divided the spoil among the
shepherds. And in company with these, the number of their young
associates daily increasing, they carried on their business and their
sports.

5. They say, that the festival of the lupercal, as now celebrated, was
even at that time solemnized on the Palatine hill, which, from
Palanteum, a city of Arcadia, was first called Palatium, and afterwards
Mount Palatine. There they say that Evander, who belonged to the tribe
of Arcadians,[10] that for many years before had possessed that country,
appointed the observance of a feast, introduced from Arcadia, in such
manner, that young men ran about naked in sport and wantonness, doing
honour to Pan Lycæus, whom the Romans afterwards called Inuus. That the
robbers, through rage at the loss of their booty, having lain in wait
for them whilst intent on this sport, as the festival was now well
known, whilst Romulus vigorously defended himself, took Remus prisoner;
that they delivered him up, when taken, to king Amulius, accusing him
with the utmost effrontery. They principally alleged it as a charge
against them, that they had made incursions upon Numitor's lands, and
plundered them in a hostile manner, having assembled a band of young men
for the purpose. Upon this Remus was delivered to Numitor to be
punished. Now, from the very first, Faustulus had entertained hopes that
the boys whom he was bringing up were of the blood royal; for he both
knew that the children had been exposed by the king's orders, and that
the time at which he had taken them up agreed exactly with that period:
but he had been unwilling that the matter, as not being yet ripe for
discovery, should be disclosed, till either a fit opportunity or
necessity should arise. Necessity came first; accordingly, compelled by
fear, he discovers the whole affair to Romulus. By accident also, whilst
he had Remus in custody, and had heard that the brothers were twins, on
comparing their age, and _observing_ their turn of mind entirely free
from servility, the recollection of his grand-children struck Numitor;
and on making inquiries[11] he arrived at the same conclusion, so that
he was well nigh recognising Remus. Thus a plot is concerted for the
king on all sides. Romulus, not accompanied by a body of young men, (for
he was unequal to open force,) but having commanded the shepherds to
come to the palace by different roads at a fixed time, forces his way to
the king; and Remus, with another party from Numitor's house, assists
his brother, and so they kill the king.

6. Numitor, at the beginning of the fray, having given out that enemies
had invaded the city, and assaulted the palace, after he had drawn off
the Alban youth to secure the citadel with a garrison and arms, when he
saw the young men, after they had killed the king, advancing to
congratulate him, immediately called an assembly of the people, and
represented to them the unnatural behaviour of his brother towards him,
the extraction of his grand-children, the manner of their birth and
education, and how they came to be discovered; then he informed them of
the king's death, and that he was killed by his orders. When the young
princes, coming up with their band through the middle of the assembly,
saluted their grandfather king, an approving shout, following from all
the people present, ratified to him both that title and the sovereignty.
Thus the government of Alba being committed to Numitor, a desire seized
Romulus and Remus to build a city on the spot where they had been
exposed and brought up. And there was an overflowing population of
Albans and of Latins. The shepherds too had come into that design, and
all these readily inspired hopes, that Alba and Lavinium would be but
petty places in comparison with the city which they intended to build.
But ambition of the sovereignty, the bane of their grandfather,
interrupted these designs, and thence arose a shameful quarrel from a
beginning sufficiently amicable. For as they were twins, and the respect
due to seniority could not determine the point, they agreed to leave to
the tutelary gods of the place to choose, by augury, which should give a
name to the new city, which govern it when built.

7. Romulus chose the Palatine and Remus the Aventine hill as their
stands to make their observations. It is said, that to Remus an omen
came first, six vultures; and now, the omen having been declared, when
double the number presented itself to Romulus, his own party saluted
each king; the former claimed the kingdom on the ground of priority of
time, the latter on account of the number of birds. Upon this, having
met in an altercation, from the contest of angry feelings they turn to
bloodshed; there Remus fell from a blow received in the crowd. A more
common account is, that Remus, in derision of his brother, leaped over
his new-built wall, and was, for that reason, slain by Romulus in a
passion; who, after sharply chiding him, added words to this effect: "So
shall every one fare, who shall dare to leap over my
fortifications."[12] Thus Romulus got the sovereignty to himself; the
city, when built, was called after the name of its founder. His first
work was to fortify the Palatine hill where he had been educated. To the
other gods he offers sacrifices according to the Alban rite; to
Hercules, according to the Grecian rite, as they had been instituted by
Evander. There is a tradition, that Hercules, having killed Geryon,
drove his oxen, which were extremely beautiful, into those places; and
that, after swimming over the Tiber, and driving the cattle before him,
being fatigued with travelling, he laid himself down on the banks of the
river, in a grassy place, to refresh them with rest and rich pasture.
When sleep had overpowered him, satiated with food and wine, a shepherd
of the place, named Cacus, presuming on his strength, and charmed with
the beauty of the oxen, wished to purloin that booty, but because, if he
had driven them forward into the cave, their footsteps would have guided
the search of their owner thither, he therefore drew the most beautiful
of them, one by one, by the tails, backwards into a cave. Hercules,
awaking at day-break, when he had surveyed his herd, and observed that
some of them were missing, goes directly to the nearest cave, to see if
by chance their footsteps would lead him thither. But when he observed
that they were all turned from it, and directed him no other way,
confounded, and not knowing what to do, he began to drive his cattle
out of that unlucky place. Upon this, some of the cows, as they usually
do, lowed on missing those that were left; and the lowings of those that
were confined being returned from the cave, made Hercules turn that way.
And when Cacus attempted to prevent him by force, as he was proceeding
to the cave, being struck with a club, he was slain, vainly imploring
the assistance of the shepherds. At that time Evander, who had fled from
the Peloponnesus, ruled this country more by his credit and reputation
than absolute sway. He was a person highly revered for his wondrous
knowledge of letters,[13] a discovery that was entirely new and
surprising to men ignorant of every art; but more highly respected on
account of the supposed divinity of his mother Carmenta, whom these
nations had admired as a prophetess, before the coming of the Sibyl into
Italy. This prince, alarmed by the concourse of the shepherds hastily
crowding round the stranger, whom they charged with open murder, after
he heard the act and the cause of the act, observing the person and mien
of the hero to be larger, and his gait more majestic, than human, asked
who he was? As soon as he was informed of his name, his father, and his
native country, he said, "Hail! Hercules! son of Jupiter, my mother, a
truth-telling interpreter of the gods, has revealed to me, that thou
shalt increase the number of the celestials; and that to thee an altar
shall be dedicated here, which some ages hence the most powerful people
on earth shall call Ara Maxima, and honour according to thy own
institution." Hercules having given him his right hand, said, "That he
accepted the omen, and would fulfil the predictions of the fates, by
building and consecrating an altar." There for the first time a
sacrifice was offered to Hercules of a chosen heifer, taken from the
herd, the Potitii and Pinarii, who were then the most distinguished
families that inhabited these parts, having been invited to the service
and the entertainment. It so happened that the Potitii were present in
due time, and the entrails were set before them; when they were eaten
up, the Pinarii came to the remainder of the feast. From this time it
was ordained, that while the Pinarian family subsisted, none of them
should eat of the entrails of the solemn sacrifices. The Potitii, being
instructed by Evander, discharged this sacred function as priests for
many ages, until the office, solemnly appropriated to their family,
being delegated to public slaves, their whole race became extinct. This
was the only foreign religious institution which Romulus adopted, being
even then an abettor of immortality attained by merit, to which his own
destinies were conducting him.

8. The duties of religion having been duly performed, and the multitude
summoned to a meeting, as they could be incorporated into one people by
no other means than fixed rules, he gave them a code of laws, and
judging that these would be best respected by this rude class of men, if
he made himself dignified by the insignia of authority, he assumed a
more majestic appearance both in his other appointments, and especially
by taking twelve lictors to attend him. Some think that he chose this
number of officers from that of the birds, which in the augury had
portended the kingdom to him. I do not object to be of the opinion of
those who will have it that the apparitors (in general), and this
particular class of them,[14] and even their number, was taken from
their neighbours the Etrurians, from whom were borrowed the curule
chair, and the gown edged with purple; and that the Etrurians adopted
that number, because their king being elected in common from twelve
states, each state assigned him one lictor. Meanwhile the city increased
by their taking in various lots of ground for buildings, whilst they
built rather with a view to future numbers, than for the population[15]
which they then had. Then, lest the size of the city might be of no
avail, in order to augment the population, according to the ancient
policy of the founders of cities, who, after drawing together to them an
obscure and mean multitude, used to feign that their offspring sprung
out of the earth, he opened as a sanctuary, a place which is now
enclosed as you go down "to the two groves."[16] Hither fled from the
neighbouring states, without distinction whether freemen or slaves,
crowds of all sorts, desirous of change: and this was the first
accession of strength to their rising greatness. When he was now not
dissatisfied with his strength, he next sets about forming some means of
directing that strength. He creates one hundred senators, either because
that number was sufficient, or because there were only one hundred who
could name their fathers. They certainly were called Fathers, through
respect, and their descendants, Patricians.[17]

9. And now the Roman state was become so powerful, that it was a match
for any of the neighbouring nations in war, but, from the paucity of
women, its greatness could only last for one age of man; for they had no
hope of issue at home, nor had they any intermarriages with their
neighbours. Therefore, by the advice of the Fathers, Romulus sent
ambassadors to the neighbouring states to solicit an alliance and the
privilege of intermarriage for his new subjects. "That cities, like
every thing else, rose from very humble beginnings. That those which the
gods and their own merit aided, gained great power and high renown. That
he knew full well, both that the gods had aided the origin of Rome, and
that merit would not be wanting. Wherefore that, as men, they should
feel no reluctance to mix their blood and race with men." No where did
the embassy obtain a favourable hearing: so much did they at the same
time despise, and dread for themselves and their posterity, so great a
power growing up in the midst of them. They were dismissed by the
greater part with the repeated question, "Whether they had opened any
asylum for women also, for that such a plan only could obtain them
suitable matches?" The Roman youth resented this conduct bitterly, and
the matter unquestionably began to point towards violence. Romulus, in
order that he might afford a favourable time and place for this,
dissembling his resentment, purposely prepares games in honour of
Neptunus Equestris; he calls them Consualia. He then orders the
spectacle to be proclaimed among their neighbours; and they prepare for
the celebration with all the magnificence they were then acquainted
with, or were capable of doing, that they might render the matter
famous, and an object of expectation. Great numbers assembled, from a
desire also of seeing the new city; especially their nearest neighbours,
the Cæninenses, Crustumini, and Antemnates. Moreover the whole multitude
of the Sabines came, with their wives and children. Having been
hospitably invited to the different houses, when they had seen the
situation, and fortifications, and the city crowded with houses, they
became astonished that the Roman power had increased so rapidly. When
the time of the spectacle came on, and while their minds and eyes were
intent upon it, according to concert a tumult began, and upon a signal
given the Roman youth ran different ways to carry off the virgins by
force. A great number were carried off at hap-hazard, according as they
fell into their hands. Persons from the common people, who had been
charged with the task, conveyed to their houses some women of surpassing
beauty, destined for the leading senators. They say that one, far
distinguished beyond the others for stature and beauty, was carried off
by the party of one Thalassius, and whilst many inquired to whom they
were carrying her, they cried out every now and then, in order that no
one might molest her, that she was being taken to Thalassius; that from
this circumstance this term became a nuptial one. The festival being
disturbed by this alarm, the parents of the young women retire in grief,
appealing to the compact of violated hospitality, and invoking the god,
to whose festival and games they had come, deceived by the pretence of
religion and good faith. Neither had the ravished virgins better hopes
of their condition, or less indignation. But Romulus in person went
about and declared, "That what was done was owing to the pride of their
fathers, who had refused to grant the privilege of marriage to their
neighbours; but notwithstanding, they should be joined in lawful
wedlock, participate in all their possessions and civil privileges, and,
than which nothing can be dearer to the human heart, in their common
children. He begged them only to assuage the fierceness of their anger,
and cheerfully surrender their affections to those to whom fortune had
consigned their persons." [He added,] "That from injuries love and
friendship often arise; and that they should find them kinder husbands
on this account, because each of them, besides the performance of his
conjugal duty, would endeavour to the utmost of his power to make up for
the want of their parents and native country." To this the caresses of
the husbands were added, excusing what they had done on the plea of
passion and love, arguments that work most successfully on women's
hearts.

10. The minds of the ravished virgins were soon much soothed, but their
parents by putting on mourning, and tears and complaints, roused the
states. Nor did they confine their resentment to their own homes, but
they flocked from all quarters to Titus Tatius, king of the Sabines; and
because he bore the greatest character in these parts, embassies were
sent to him. The Cæninenses, Crustumini, and Antemnates were people to
whom a considerable portion of the outrage extended. To them Tatius and
the Sabines seemed to proceed somewhat dilatorily. Nor even do the
Crustumini and Antemnates bestir themselves with sufficient activity to
suit the impatience and rage of the Cæninenses. Accordingly the state of
the Cæninenses by itself makes an irruption into the Roman territory.
But Romulus with his army met them ravaging the country in straggling
parties, and by a slight engagement convinces them, that resentment
without strength is of no avail. He defeats and routs their army,
pursues it when routed, kills and despoils their king in battle, and
having slain their general takes the city at the first assault. From
thence having led back his victorious army, and being a man highly
distinguished by his exploits, and one who could place them in the best
light, went in state to the capitol, carrying before him, suspended on a
frame curiously wrought for that purpose, the spoils of the enemy's
general, whom he had slain, and there after he had laid them down at the
foot of an oak held sacred by the shepherds, together with the offering,
he marked out the bounds for a temple of Jupiter, and gave a surname to
the god: "Jupiter Feretrius," he says, "I, king Romulus, upon my
victory, present to thee these royal arms, and to thee I dedicate a
temple within those regions which I have now marked out in my mind, as a
receptacle for the grand spoils, which my successors, following my
example, shall, upon their killing the kings or generals of the enemy,
offer to thee." This is the origin of that temple, the first consecrated
at Rome. It afterwards so pleased the gods both that the declaration of
the founder of the temple should not be frustrated, by which he
announced that his posterity should offer such spoils, and that the
glory of that offering should not be depreciated by the great number of
those who shared it. During so many years, and amid so many wars since
that time, grand spoils have been only twice gained,[18] so rare has
been the successful attainment of that honour.